New research sheds light on “enterprise friendly” AI 
 Article by 
 By 
 When C-suite executives think about artificial intelligence (AI), they traditionally think of the same names they’ve thought of for years. But a new study just out from HFS Research suggests that it’s time for them to think again. 
 “Microsoft is emerging as the most ‘enterprise friendly’ AI ecosystem” according to the research, HFS Top 10 Microsoft AI Services 2019. “Few are better positioned to deliver the power of AI to enterprises than Microsoft, a technology giant with extensive cloud delivery and hosting infrastructure, ground-breaking AI R&D, and longstanding experience working with large enterprises.” 
 The HFS research mirrors what I’ve seen in 26 years in the industry, helping enterprise clients to adopt technologies including AI. It used to be that AI adoption was a massive undertaking, consuming millions of dollars and years of effort. Consequently, it was the prerogative of only the largest companies. 
 Against that background, Microsoft’s accomplishment in democratizing AI, in bringing AI to the masses, is breathtaking. Microsoft has made AI readily consumable in a variety of ways. It is connecting AI to the core of every application, platform and process. Its deep investments in research and development around speech recognition, image recognition and other elements of AI are helping to propel the industry forward at an incredible rate. 
 The new economics of AI, combined with the ease of subscribing to existing services rather than building from scratch, expand the universe of potential users exponentially. Mom-and-pop shops can begin to use AI as an off-the-shelf commodity, while the Fortune 500 can build the most secure, distributed AI solutions for their most complex business problems. 
 Another key finding of the HFS Research study demonstrates one more way in which Microsoft has made AI enterprise friendly. The researchers identified a rich ecosystem of service providers that have formed alliances with Microsoft specifically over AI. Those alliances cover proof-of-concept and pilot funding, talent development, workshops, technical collaboration, joint research, IP creation, and more. 
 And their existence makes it even easier for companies, whatever their size, to adopt Microsoft AI successfully. With the Microsoft ecosystem drawing on the best talent around the world, customers can expect that their AI services and solutions will remain cutting edge for the foreseeable future. 
 If you’re already an Azure customer, you’ll likely be surprised at how little it will take to kick off a proof of concept that demonstrates the business value you can get from AI. We’ll be glad to show you. 
 Tags 
 Avanade is committed to protecting your information security. Your information will be used in accordance with any applicable data privacy law, our internal policies and our Privacy Policy, and will be held securely. Avanade will not share your personal information with any third party, except as needed to manage the events or features for which you register. By using this site you agree that we can place cookies on your device. Please review our complete Privacy Policy for additional information. 
 Some of the required fields (*) are missing, please review your information. 
 