AI strategy: building your digital ethics framework 
 Article by 
 By 
 Neural networks. Autonomous things. Intelligent agents. Speech recognition. Cognitive computing. Machine Learning. These are all considered smart technologies, which fall under the Artificial Intelligence (AI) umbrella. Technology innovations are becoming more affordable, more widely adopted and more ubiquitous every day. AI promises a completely new way for us to work, interact and serve our customers and employees. 
 Unchartered territory and potential risks
But what’s equally striking is the magnitude and weight of uncertainty in our digitally-transformed future. Aside from the more dangerous predictions of our doomsday, AI introduces unchartered moral and ethical dilemmas, a staggering new scale to potential risks and copious unintentional consequences, all which rest squarely on our shoulders. We have a lot at stake. Time and time again, splashed across our headlines, we get very alarming and very real reminders about wide-reaching data breaches, racial and gender bias in algorithms, spying internet-connected devices, botnets and IoT hacks or complex moral problems that we can’t answer, such as the self-driving car crash conundrum. These sobering reminders should not damper the boundless excitement for our AI-first world, but rather motivate us to take control over our digital destiny. As a first step, businesses need to establish digital ethics standards that will guide our journey. 
 Building your digital ethics framework Avanade’s TechVision 2017 includes guidance and discussion around digital ethics. Drawing from that, here are three best practices to consider when creating a digital ethics framework for your business: 
 1. Start with the customer
At the outset, before adopting any new technology start with what’s best for your customers and employees. Rather than what’s possible or what’s easy, it starts with your people. A laser focus on your end user will help shape your digital ethics processes. Starting with the customer, and not the technology, guarantees that the standards and ethics that accompany your digital approach will be shaped and informed by what your business can do best for its customers. 
 2. Data transparency
Digital ethics is no different than business ethics. Your existing business code of ethics and compliance with the existing legal landscape is an important starting point for digital ethics. The big difference lies in a much greater responsibility businesses need to take to protect the vast amounts of data and information that is generated and collected in our AI-first reality. Businesses require much more thoughtful processes and much greater awareness at all levels to successfully protect information and data from being mishandled. From the very beginning, organizations must be transparent with its customers and employees around how much data should be gathered, how data is being used, how it must be treated, and what is and is not acceptable. 
 3. Ethics at all levels
Digital ethics requires organizations to maintain a regular dialogue with stakeholders around ethical issues. This means standards, guidelines and processes at your organization around ethics is not left up to software developers or engineers to figure out. A regular ethics review cycle is critical. For example, for updating policies around customer data protection, regular review cycles help build clear expectations for customers and inform employees how this information should be treated. 
 These are the building blocks for getting started with digital ethics and required for charting a course in our AI-first world that’s rapidly adopting technology that is smarter than ever. 
 Avanade is committed to protecting your information security. Your information will be used in accordance with any applicable data privacy law, our internal policies and our Privacy Policy, and will be held securely. Avanade will not share your personal information with any third party, except as needed to manage the events or features for which you register. By using this site you agree that we can place cookies on your device. Please review our complete Privacy Policy for additional information. 
 Some of the required fields (*) are missing, please review your information. 
 Steve Rogger 
 The AI is building up a new strategy and it can be great in near future. If you are studying about AI you need to know it in different aspects. The framework is one of the main things that must be learned aside from AI. 
 