How will AI and digitisation impact the legal profession? 
 Article by 
 By 
 The artificial intelligence (AI) revolution is here and there is nothing we can do to avoid it, even if we tried. From a hotel robot that delivers items to guest rooms to pizza delivering drones and robot bricklayers, the list goes on. There are several authorities and publications that are all reinforcing the fact that we will need to familiarise ourselves with robots in the workplace and that several jobs will be supervised by a robot boss by the end of this year. 
 Since the economic crisis in 2008, we have seen law firms in Australia respond to the changing nature of the industry with several mergers among them. But now leaders must answer this burning question – how will they cope with digitisation and the impact it will have on the legal profession? 
 There is no argument that the legal industry is one that will benefit the most from digitisation of workplaces for several key reasons. Digitisation has created new opportunities and practice areas for law firms such as regulation and legal advice for data protection, privacy, digital ethics and cybersecurity. Plus, the improved ability for lawyers to service their clients on a more agile basis, focus on more complex tasks and a significant reduction in administrative processes. 
 It is a common belief that legal professionals think that AI will take away jobs instead of help. However, as categorised using Mark Breading’s analysis, the answer to whether robots will take over legal jobs is “MAYBE.” This is on the basis that a lawyer’s role requires so much human judgement, intuition, advisory skills and empathy that it will be a very long time (if ever) before AI could fully take over. 
 Avanade's Sarah Adam-Gedge recently wrote an article entitled, "Three strategic steps to get started with AI", suggests that it makes sense to pilot AI in one of two forms; robotic process automation (RPA); or intelligent automation. She recommends that in order to assess the value of RPA in your organisation, you must undertake a thorough review of day-to-day activities and ask several questions: Are workers repeating routine tasks throughout their day? Do these tasks involve predictable decision making? Can the process patterns be taught or learnt with relative simplicity? 
 It is likely that even though each legal problem is unique in facts and circumstances, the answer to these questions is yes depending on legislation and case precedents. There is certainly an opportunity to introduce some form of RPA in law firm. 
 A shift must be taken by legal practices that remain stuck in cumbersome, paper-based processes that are inefficient and costly. There’s a real need for the legal profession to digitise in the information age that we are operating in today. The challenges now faced by law firms are not only increased competition and pressure to reduce operating expenses, but also the rapid deployment of legal software, AI and RPA technologies. 
 Avanade is committed to protecting your information security. Your information will be used in accordance with any applicable data privacy law, our internal policies and our Privacy Policy, and will be held securely. Avanade will not share your personal information with any third party, except as needed to manage the events or features for which you register. By using this site you agree that we can place cookies on your device. Please review our complete Privacy Policy for additional information. 
 Some of the required fields (*) are missing, please review your information. 
 Oliver Harris 
 “Doing more with less” is one way in which RPA can increase efficiency. It can be operationalised in terms of an improved proportion between the cost and the value of the large amount of bureaucratic processes that are inherently involved in law. With outcomes of this kind, automation is likely to become a ‘must’ and not merely a (good) option for an efficient legal industry of the future.
CiGen (an Australian RPA pure-specialist) emphasises that processes in the law area like those mentioned above together with support functions in the legal industry, functions like finance or HR, for example can greatly assist law firms of all sizes. We list just a few of them. 
 