Enamoured by the promise of “do-it-yourself” and results in weeks, companies invest in RPA / AI projects or proof of concepts (POCs) to automate processes. However, for many, the initial enthusiasm soon wanes off and disillusionment sets in as they struggle to bring a step change in their business and move the needle. RPA becomes yet another addition to their technical debt! 
 The answer to this seemingly innocuous question changes the mindset, approach and direction of these programs separating winners from losers as summarised below: 
 •Mindset – enlightened leaders recognise that RPA/AI technologies have the potential to drive a step change in the business, if rightly implemented. They view RPA/AI as a strategic sourcing option; not just a shiny toy that automates processes or performs “magic on the desktop.”
•Sponsorship – once the disruptive potential is understood, a C-level sponsor is identified (usually A COO or CFO), a bold ambition is set and a team mobilised with cross-business unit / department remit to bring pace and velocity to the program. In contrast, companies that start with a handful of processes sponsored by a process or department owner without a top-level vision or leadership buy-in tend to struggle to scale beyond small pilots.•Business change – successful transformations start with a recognition that introducing a virtual workforce to augment humans will impact all aspects of the business – customer experience, HR, IT, security, legal, sales and more. AI needs to be treated as a business change program building consensus, addressing concerns and carrying people along.•Outcome focus – in their enthusiasm, teams are often tempted to force fit RPA/AI on every problem or process. Successful transformations address this through strong demand management processes, prioritisation underpinned by business case and a bias for small but rapid delivery increments. This requires embracing agile, DevOps and modern engineering practices.•Journey vs. destination – the pace of change around us requires leaders to be on the alert for the next wave of emerging technologies and separating the disruptive ones from the noise. Successful leaders address this through an in-house team to scan the market or engaging partners who embed Innovation in the program. For instance, Avanade Innovation days (i-Days) help customers envision real-life use cases for emerging technologies not just in their industry but across industries and provide practical ways of starting the journey. 
 Contrary to popular perception, establishing a foundation with the above building blocks need not take months or cost a fortune, if delivered by an experienced team. As a famous quote summarises, “if you don’t have time to do it right, you have to find time to do it again.” 
 In summary, the question we ask as a leadership team and the ambition we set drives the mindset, direction and success of an automation initiative. 
 As a leader, how do you view RPA/AI - a tactical tool or a transformation lever? 
 Tags 
 Avanade is committed to protecting your information security. Your information will be used in accordance with any applicable data privacy law, our internal policies and our Privacy Policy, and will be held securely. Avanade will not share your personal information with any third party, except as needed to manage the events or features for which you register. By using this site you agree that we can place cookies on your device. Please review our complete Privacy Policy for additional information. 
 Some of the required fields (*) are missing, please review your information. 
 