Are you embracing Artificial Intelligence? 
 Article by 
 By 
 Working in a business development role in Perth for over 10 years has allowed me to work across a diverse range of clients. Unlike the east coast of Australia, Perth has resources as a dominant industry, and we have clients spread across a sprinkling of other industries. This has forced me to try and understand how technology can support organizations with different needs and perspectives. 
 While working with Avanade over the past 8 months, I have continued to see the growth and relevance of artificial intelligence (AI) in our world today. What I find most interesting is that it is already affecting us all, and impacting businesses, big and small. Check out the report on industry automation produced by AlphaBeta that shows Australia is lagging behind the rest of the world, and that AI will be a $2.2 trillion opportunity by 2030. Australian organisations need to get on board sooner, and if we embrace it, not only will it create more jobs, it will generate more revenue. 
 The AI Race, a TV show that recently aired on ABC in Australia, showed how AI will affect jobs. Some will be impacted more than others, but almost all jobs will be disrupted in one form or another. AI has recently cracked into Gartner's top 10 search terms and they have emphasized the impact of AI in their Hyper Cycle for emerging technology 2017 report Gartner has also stated that by 2020 AI will be a top 5 investment priority for more than 30% of CIO's. 
 Amazon.com has been using AI to predict product demand, power search rankings, create and recommend deals, detect fraud, and translate the site into other languages. There are numerous self-driving cars emerging, Microsoft even has an AI app that helps visually impaired people understand their surroundings better, as you’ll see in this video: 
 Elon Musk is a strong believer that AI has a large part to play in our future and has recently signed a petition against lethal autonomous weapons. He has also just had his Dota 2 AI bot beat the world's best professionals in eSports (using Azure I might add). This is the next step since Watson won at Jeopardy. 
 Microsoft & Avanade are making large investments in AI. In fact, Avanade's Technology Vision has a strong focus on AI and how it will impact industry. I expect to be talking about it a lot over the next few years with my clients and believe CIO's need to start thinking how it will be affecting their business and making sure that current strategies and projects incorporate how AI will be involved in the future. 
 So, have you thought about AI and how it will impact your organization and your industry more broadly? How do you plan to embrace AI? 
 Tags 
 Avanade is committed to protecting your information security. Your information will be used in accordance with any applicable data privacy law, our internal policies and our Privacy Policy, and will be held securely. Avanade will not share your personal information with any third party, except as needed to manage the events or features for which you register. By using this site you agree that we can place cookies on your device. Please review our complete Privacy Policy for additional information. 
 Some of the required fields (*) are missing, please review your information. 
 