The power of intelligent automation at Nintex xchange 2018 
 Article by 
 By 
 The power of intelligent automation at Nintex xchange 2018 
 As I’m about to head off to San Diego for the Nintex xchange™ Conference, which opens on the theme, "The Era of Intelligent Process Automation," I'm reminded of Avanade's journey in Intelligent IT, and more specifically, Intelligent Automation. 
 Avanade has a long pedigree of expertise in technology, as an experienced System Integrator, we've always taken the long-term view for our clients. With our vision to be the leading digital innovator, and the recent announcement of Avanade's digital consulting expansion into mainland Europe, we're more focused on the Intelligent Enterprise than ever before. 
 Artificial intelligence, or just 'intelligence,' has the potential to fundamentally change the way we do business, providing new experiences and insights for customers and employees. 
 Intelligent automation is one of these opportunities for transformative innovation, understanding, reasoning, and engaging with humans in more natural ways. 
 With the key themes at Nintex xchange of automating and orchestrating the modern workplace, and the era of intelligent process automation, I think this will be a great opportunity to discover more about using intelligent automation to drive real business benefits such as productivity or security, whilst understanding the key role of responsible intelligence. 
 Productivity - Using the power of intelligent automation to increase productivity, by enabling sales, assisting agents, and providing an augmented workforce to complete mundane tasks 
 Security - Using the power of intelligent automation to secure your organisation, identifying and classifying threats, to proactively respond and secure data 
 Responsibility - Using the power of intelligent automation to help people, adapting to their ways of working to surface information at the right time, to identify hidden patterns and point out events that you may never have noticed 
 If you are at Nintex xchange next week, and these topics excite you as much as they do me, then I invite you to hear Craig Wood, Intelligent Automation Global Lead at Avanade, speaking at the Keynote on the 'Era of Intelligent Process Automation!' Stop by for musings on the role of intelligence in the enterprise and how to leverage machine learning in your organization. 
 Tags 
 Avanade is committed to protecting your information security. Your information will be used in accordance with any applicable data privacy law, our internal policies and our Privacy Policy, and will be held securely. Avanade will not share your personal information with any third party, except as needed to manage the events or features for which you register. By using this site you agree that we can place cookies on your device. Please review our complete Privacy Policy for additional information. 
 Some of the required fields (*) are missing, please review your information. 
 