01 August 2009 
 Welcome to everyone to ACL! It's pretty rare for me to end up conferencing in a country I've been before, largely because I try to avoid it. When I was here last time, I stayed with Yee Whye, who was here at the time as a postdoc at NUS, and lived here previously in his youth. As a result, he was an excellent "tour guide." With his help, here's a list of mostly food related stuff that you should definitely try while here (see also the ACL blog): 
 Pepper crab. The easiest to find are the "No Signboard" restaurant chain. Don't wear a nice shirt unless you plan on doing laundry. 
 Chicken rice. This sounds lame. Sure, chicken is kind of tasty. Rice is kind of tasty. But the key is that the rice is cooked in or with melted chicken fat. It's probably the most amazingly simple and delicious dish I've ever had. "Yet Kun" (or something like that) is along Purvis street. 
 Especially for dessert, there's Ah Chew, a Chinese place around Liang Seah street in the Bugis area (lots of other stuff there too). 
 Hotpot is another local specialty: there is very good spicy Szechuan hotpot around Liang Seah street. 
 For real Chinese tea, here. (Funny aside: when I did this, they first asked "have you had tea before?" Clearly the meaning is "have you had real Chinese tea prepared traditionally and tasted akin to a wine tasting?" But I don't think I would ever ask someone "have you had wine before?" But I also can't really think of a better way to ask this!) 
 Good late night snacks can be found at Prata stalls (eg., indian roti with curry). 
 The food court at Vivocity, despite being a food court, is very good. You should have some hand-pressed sugar cane juice -- very sweet, but very tasty (goes well with some spicy hotpot). 
 Okay, so this list is all food. But frankly, what else are you going to do here? Go to malls? :). There's definitely nice architecture to be seen; I would recommend the Mosque off of Arab street; of course you have to go to the Esplanade (the durian-looking building); etc. You can see a few photos from my last trip here. 
 Now, I realize that most of the above list is not particularly friendly to my happy cow friends. Here's a list of restaurants that happy cow provides. There are quite a few vegetarian options, probably partially because of the large Muslim population here. There aren't as many vegan places, but certainly enough. For the vegan minded, there is a good blog about being vegan in Singapore (first post is about a recent local talk by Campbell, the author of The China Study, which I recommend everyone at least reads). I can't vouch for the quality of these places, but here's a short list drawn from Living Vegan: 
 And oh-my-gosh, there's actually veggie chicken rice, though it doesn't seem like it holds up to the same standards as real chicken rice (if it did, that would be impressive) 
 Okay, you can find more for yourself if you go through their links :). 
 Enjoy your time here! 
 Quick update: Totally forgot about coffee. If you need your espresso kick, Highlander coffee (49 Kampong Bahru Road) comes the most recommended, but is a bit of a hike from the conference area. Of course, you could also try the local specialty: burnt crap with condensed milk (lots and lots of discussion especially on page two here). 
 You share valuable information and excellent design you got here! I would like to thank you for sharing your thoughts and time into the stuff you post!! Thumbs up. Please come visit my site inventory management articles give me any valuable feedbacks. 
 I was thinking of looking up some of them newspaper websites, but am glad I came here instead. Although glad is not quite the right word… let me just say I needed this after the incessant chatter in the media, and am grateful to you for articulating something many of us are feeling - even from distant shores. Please come visit my site lean production give me any valuable feedbacks. 
 Couldn't be written any better. Reading this post reminds me of my old room mate! He always kept talking about this. I will forward this article to him. Pretty sure he will have a good read. Thanks for sharing! I would love some feedback on my site vacations when you got time. 
 Excellent article , i just share it with my friend of Italy. I Stumble UP your blog post , you will notice an increase of traffic within 24 hours for targeted people. Cheers . Please come visit my site store give me any valuable feedbacks. 
 That is some inspirational stuff... Never know that opinions could be this varied. Thanks for all the enthusiasm to offer such helpful information here. Please come visit my site high school when you got time. 
 You share valuable information and excellent design you got here! I would like to thank you for sharing your thoughts and time into the stuff you post!! Thumbs up. Please come visit my site Long Beach Phone Numbers when you got time. 
 I wanted to thank you for this great read!! I definitely enjoying every little bit of it :) I have you bookmarked to check out new stuff you post. Please visit my Please visit my blog when you have time Please come visit my site silver jewelry when you got time. 
 I am not much into reading, but somehow I got to read lots of articles on your blog. Its amazing how interesting it is for me to visit you very often :) Please come visit my site pashmina shawls give me any valuable feedbacks. 
 I usually don’t leave comments!!! Trust me! But I liked your blog…especially this post! Would you mind terribly if I put up a backlink from my site to your site? Please come visit my site Free Business Listing of Indianapolis when you got time. 
 I usually don’t leave comments!!! Trust me! But I liked your blog…especially this post! Would you mind terribly if I put up a backlink from my site to your site? Please come visit my site Business Services Web Directory Of Indianapolis when you got time. 
 Me and my friend were arguing about an issue similar to this! Now I know that I was right. lol! Thanks for the information you post. I would love some feedback on my sitechecklist moving when you got time. 
 Excellent article , i just share it with my friend of Italy. I Stumble UP your blog post , you will notice an increase of traffic within 24 hours for targeted people. Cheers . Please come visit my site Santa Ana City Business Listings when you got time. 
 Excellent article , i just share it with my friend of Italy. I Stumble UP your blog post , you will notice an increase of traffic within 24 hours for targeted people. Cheers . Please come visit my site Business Resources Comprehensive Listings when you got time. 
 Awesome! I have read a lot on this topic, but you definitely give it a good vibe. This is a great post. Will be back to read more! Please come visit my site Business Trade Guide of Las Vegas Nevada NV when you got time. 
 Me and my friend were arguing about an issue similar to this! Now I know that I was right. lol! Thanks for the information you post. Please come visit my site Me and my friend were arguing about an issue similar to this! Now I know that I was right. 
 You may have not intended to do so, but I think you have managed to express the state of mind that a lot of people are in. The sense of wanting to help, but not knowing how or where, is something a lot of us are going through. Please come visit my site compare broadband when you got time. 
 