26 August 2006 
 I heard a story on NPR while driving today that referenced a recent Financial Times story about the use of natural language generation technology for producing financial stories. The financial company, Thomson, is now generating some of its stories using NLG. The NLG technology, based on the little bit of information I gathered from the NPR story and reading the associated article, seems to be straightforward template filling. This is not terribly surprising, given the stagnant nature of financial articles (grab any such article from WSJ and you see things like "The DOW went up ____ percent (___ points) because of ___." Most of this can be easily gathered from databases. 
 One might suspect that the final "___" (the reason) would be hard to come up with automatically, but apparently this is highly standardized as well. According to the NPR story following the one on the NLG technology, the number of reasons that fill that blank is nearly closed class ("profits" or "middle east" or "terrorism" or "bin Laden videotape" or "strong trading" or ...). And, based on some hear-say evidence, the reasons are largely bogus anyway (this is not surprising: summarizing one billion trades as being driven by a bin Laden videotape is highly suspect). 
 An amusing comment was made when the journalist at NPR asked the Thomson rep if his job was in danger. The response was that it was, only if he believed that his abilities topped out at filling out templates. 
 Anyway, if anyone knows more about the technology, and if there's anything interesting in it, it would be fun to know. Beyond that, I just thought it was fun that NLP technology made a spot on NPR. 
 39 comments: 
 Mind.html in JavaScript is a natural language generation (NLG) program that tries to address the stating of reasons by linking "why" inputs with "because" outputs. The theory is that at first the artificial mind will approximate a reason simply by associating to whatever it thinks about the subject for which a "why?" is being demanded. As these artificial minds become more intelligent and think more profoundly, they should zero in with greater focus on the true etiology of things and start a truly intelligent response with the "because" conjunction. Meanwhile, the Mind.html software is gearing up to show users the underlying process of thought when the program is in tutorial mode. 
 I'm quite interested in this subject, how to create templates and text generation schemes for newspaper reporting. Since almost everything that is in a typical newspaper is subject to well-understood (and articulated) principles (for example the AP Writers Guid), in principle almost all copy might as well be written by machines with a few inputs. 
 Sometimes it happens that for the same ailment different treatments are offered by different doctors. This confuses the patients to a great deal. Which treatment to go for, which doctor to follow etc, etc. Under these circumstances people can refer to the patient info sites where they can get all the information regarding the disease, its treatments, prices etc. 
 Great opportunities for poker cheap capital. Sign in one or five bankrolls and play real money online game. free instructional Poker and deposit combinate bonus pro for me. Very strong poker benefits goes straight form this site. gaming is that more and much more people are playing. That's why we schould take one no deposit full tilt bonus up to 50 dollars. Gift for your family are big. 
 What we do on the job inevitably shapes who we are and how we live. This Labor sportsbook Day weekend, NPR takes a moment to reflect on work, through three people who have found niches in the labor market. And while layoffs continue throughout bet nfl the country, we look at how and why millions of Americans each month are finding new jobs.White House breaks with previous administrations, agrees to release names of visitors.Opposition To Obama's Health Care Overhaul http://www.enterbet.com HardensObama Speech To Students Faces OppositionWould You Want Your Kid To Watch Or Skip The President's Address? 
 Enabling embodied systems to process natural language is a prerequisite for robust human oriented machine interaction. Natural language capabilities can help to make these systems more user friendly and effective. http://www.meadbrown.com Natural language can be used in a flexible way so that little training is needed to instruct an agent and if speech processing is possible, the agent can even be instructed by a human without significant interruption of ongoing work.costa rica vacation rentals 
 Generic Viagra is the medicine that is recommended by doctors worldwide for erectile dysfunction. It is the chemical composition of both forms of this drug and helps to cause erection on stimulation of the penis by inhibiting the enzyme phosphodiesterase type 5 which causes smooth muscle relaxation and a better erection. 
 Police deployed chemical irritants, including CS gas, Sportsbook and long-range acoustic devices (LRAD) in residential neighborhoods on narrow streets where families and small children were exposed. Scores of riot police formed barricades at many intersections throughout neighborhoods miles away from the downtown area and the David Lawrence Convention Center. Outside the Courtyard Marriott in Shadyside, online betting police deployed smoke bombs in the absence of protest activity, forcing bystanders and hotel residents to flee the area.Later, while some protests were ending, riot-clad officers surrounded an area at the University of Pittsburgh, creating an ominous spectacle that some described as akin to Kent State. Guild legal observers witnessed police chasing and arresting many uninvolved students. Among other questionable tactics, march madness officers from dozens of law enforcement agencies lacked easily-identifiable badges, impeding citizens' ability to register complaints.http://www.canadacasino.com 
 Generic Cialis is slightly different from the other erectile drugs available in the market as it may work up to 36 hrs after dosing. Generic Levitra orks along with sexual stimulation to help achieve an erection when taken 30 to 60 minutes before sexual activity. 
 Generic Viagra contains Sildenafil and it is a prescription drug used to treat erectile dysfunction. Erectile dysfunction is the inability of the penis to become rigid, or stay firm long enough to complete the sexual act. 
 Really trustworthy blog. Please keep updating with great posts like this one. I have booked marked your site and am about to email it to a few friends of mine that I know would enjoy reading..sesli sohbetsesli chatsesli sohbet siteleri 
 guoweigangSpeaking to the Ed Hardy Sale Gazette earlier this year, Mr abercrombie and fitch Gifford said he was hopeful ed hardy clothing the company could rally. He said: "I am Abercrombie Outlet reasonably confident that there are investors out there who will support us. It's a great company. We just need to get the financial side in order."I am sure we can recover the position of the number one company in the market." The corporate clothing firm employs 220 people Ed Hardy store in Thornbury and a further 50 in nearby Aztec West. Nationally, at shops and warehouses, the company employs nearly 500 people.Alexandra Plc first started as a small shop in Bristol, in 1854. The company started to sell work wear in the 1950s and was first floated on the stock market in 1985. 
 