12 June 2018 
 A while ago I created this image for thinking about how
machine learning systems tend to get deployed. In this figure, for Chapter 2 of CIML, the left column shows a generic decision being
made, and the right column shows an example of this decision in the case of
advertising placement on a search engine we’ve built. 
 The purpose of the image at the time was basically thinking
of different types of “approximation” error, where we have some real world goal
(e.g., increase revenue) and design a machine learning system to achieve that.
The point here, which echoes a lot of the Rules of Machine
Learning by Martin Zinkevich (who
knows much more about this than I do) writes about, is that it’s important to
recognize that there’s a whole lot of stuff that goes around any machine
learning system, and each piece puts an upper bound on what you can achieve. 
 A year or two ago, in talking to Suresh Venkatasubramanian, we
realized that it’s also perhaps an interesting way to think about different
places that “discrimination” might come into a system (I’ll avoid the term “bias”
because it’s overloaded here with the “bias/variance tradeoff”). By “discrimination”
I simply mean a situation in which some subpopulation is disadvantaged. Below
are some thoughts on how this might happen. 
 To make things more interesting (and navel-gaze-y), I’m
going to switch from the example of ad display to paper recommendations in a
hypothetical arxiv rss-feed-based paper recommendation system. To be absolutely
clear, this is very much a contrived, simplified thought example, and not meant
to be reflective of any decisions anyone or any company has made. (For the
purposes of this example, I will assume all papers on arxiv are in English.) 
 In stating this goal, we are explicitly making a value judgment of what
matters. In this case, one part of this value judgment is that it’s only new papers that are interesting,
potentially disadvantaging authors who have high quality older work. It also advantages
people who put their papers on arxiv, which is not a uniform slice of the
research population. 
 2.We now need a real-world mechanism to achieve our goal: an iPhone app that shows
extracted information from a paper that users can thumbs-up or thumbs-down (or
swipe left/right as you prefer). 
 By deciding to build an iPhone app, we have privileged iPhone users over users
of other phones, which likely correlates both with country of residence and
economic status of the user. By designing the mechanism such that extracted
paper information is shown and a judgment is collected immediately, we are possibly
advantaging papers (and thereby the authors of those papers) whose
contributions can be judged quickly, or which seem flashy (click-bait-y). Similarly,
since human flash judgments may focus on less relevant features, we may be
biasing toward authors who are native English speakers, because things like
second language errors may disproportionately affect quick judgments. 
 3.Next, set up a learning problem: online prediction of thumbs-up/down for papers
displayed to the user (essentially a contextual bandit learning problem). 
 I actually don’t have anything to say on this one. Open to ideas 😊. 
 4.Next, we define a mechanism for collecting data:
we will deploy a system and use epsilon-greedy exploration to collect data. 
 There are obviously repercussions to this decision, but I’m not sure any are discriminatory.
Had we chosen a more sophisticated exploration policy, this could possibly run
into discrimination issues because small populations might get “explored on”
more, potentially disadvantaging them. 
 By choosing to record author and institution
(for instance), we are both opening up the possibility of discrimination against
certain authors or institutions, but, because many techniques for addressing discrimination
in machine learning assume that you
have access to some notion of protected category, we are also opening up the
possibility of remedying that. Similarly, by recording the abstract, we are (similar
but different to before) opening the possibility for discrimination by degree
of English proficiency. 
 6.Given this logged data, we have to choose a data
representation: for this we’ll take text from title, authors, institution and
abstract, and then have features for the current user of the system (e.g., the
same features from their own papers), and a binary signal for thumbs up/down. 
 A major source of potential discrimination here comes from the features we use
of the current user. If the current user, for instance, only has a small number
of papers from which we can learn about the topics they care about, then the
system will plausibly work worse for them than for someone with lots of papers
(and therefore a more robust user profile). 
 7.Next we choose a model family: for simplicity
and because we have a “cold start” problem, instead of going the full neural
network route, we’ll just use a bag-of-embeddings representation for the paper
being considered, and a bag-of-embeddings representation for the user, and
combine them with cross-product features into a linear model. 
 This is a fairly easy representation to understand. Because we’ve chosen a bag
of embeddings, this could plausibly underperform on topics/areas where the
keywords are separated by spaces (e.g., I heard a story once that someone who
works mostly on dependency parsing tends to get lots of papers suggested to them
to review by TPMS on decision tree models because of the overlap of the word “tree”).
It’s not clear to me that there are obvious discrimination issues here, but it
could be. 
 8.Selecting the training data: in this case, the
training data is simply coming online, so the discussion in (3) applies. 
 9.We now train the model and select
hyperparameters: again, this is an online setting, so there’s really no
train/test split, so this question doesn’t really apply (though see the comment
about exploration in #4). 
 10.The model is then used to make predictions:
again, online, doesn’t really apply. 
 11.Lastly, we evaluate error: here, the natural is
0/1 loss on whether thumbs up/down was predicted correctly or not. 
 In choosing to evaluate our system based only on average 0/1 loss over the run,
we are potentially missing the opportunity to even observe systematic bias. An alternative would be to do things like
evaluating 0/1 error as a function of various confounding variables, like
institution prestige, author prolificity, some measure of nativism of the
language, etc. Similarly breaking the error down into features of the user for
similar reasons. Finally, considering not just error but separating out false
positive and false negatives can often reveal discriminatory structures not
otherwise obvious. 
 ---------------------------- 
 I don’t think this analysis is perfect, and some things don’t
really apply, but I found it to be a useful thought exercise. 
 One thing very interesting about thinking about
discrimination in this setting is that there are two opportunities to mess up:
on the content provider (author) side and on the content consumer (reader) side.
This comes up in other places too: should your music/movie/etc. recommender
just recommend popular things to you or should it be fair to content providers
who are less well known? (Thanks to Fernando
Diaz for this example.) 
 