Cashbots 
 Chatbots are making interactions with banks a genuine pleasure 
 Photocredit; Shutterstock/ ESB Professional 
 Have you ever been put on hold by a bank, or routed from pillar to post to no avail? Or have you tried to find out the latest interest rates on your account on the bank website? It’s nearly impossible sometimes. But change is in the air thanks to chatbots as I found out when I recently spoke to Avi Ben Ezra, Chief Technology Officer of Snatchbot.me 
 How will financial organisations dealing benefit from Chatbots when dealing with the public? 
 Although some banks have begun to look at chatbots, such as Moneygram with its Sendbot, and Western Union with its integrated cross-border transfer platform into Messenger, many financial organisations have done little to advance their client communications systems. Often their best effort is a ‘Q and A’ page on a website or an automated response system. This is very limiting and customers are frustrated. So they have a very long way to go to catch up with the Messenger platform, which has about 1.2 billion users. 
 Times are changing rapidly, however, and chatbots are creating a revolution, becoming more integrated with financial systems at all levels. Customers using a chatbot receive a better and simpler-to-operate information provider, which works in real time, answering questions on the spot. Not only do consumers want quick, easy access to information but they want the interaction to be engaging and personal. This is where chatbots have a real advantage because they provide real-time engagement and a human-like interaction. The user is made to feel they are included in the process of wealth management. Customers who feel included, who are communicating with banks through chatbots, will invest their future with the bank and that is important for them and the financial institution. 
 Do customers like chatbots? 
 Yes they do. It has been well attested that people prefer the sense of conversation and interaction that comes with a chatbot over navigating with a mouse and click. This is even though the customer is fully aware that the bot is simply software. As a matter of fact, there are several interesting studies showing that elderly people, especially, have positive experiences from interacting with chatbots. Whether it is something deep rooted in our humanity that we anthropomorphise, the fact is that people feel happier with a communication experience via a chatbot than a rigid scripted interaction. And for the bank, the chatbot is a fantastic means of projecting the kinds of values and character of the brand. This is far more the case than is possible from a website alone. 
 Another positive for customers is that they no longer have to navigate traditional one-sided transaction menus and screens and automated computer language. This is frustrating and time consuming. What they get with chatbots is human language interaction. Chatbots have human-like conversations and give answers quickly and efficiently. Who has the time to be put on hold on the phone or hustled from one department to another? We want the information as quickly as possible. A chatbot saves time, freeing people up for other activities. And through chatbots customers can make trades, receive alerts regarding stock market activity, or even find a mortgage. 
 Are Chatbots secure? 
 This is a critical question for the financial world. And the answer is, they can be, depending on the type of chatbot. If you look at the Snatchbot platform, it has built in security and administration requirement to the highest level expected by international organisations. This is important for the security not only of the financial organisation, but also for the customer. As Matt Kinney of IBM put it, ‘it’s a question of trust, so that the consumer will come back to the same organisation’. 
 Well-designed chatbots enable administrators to retain exclusive oversight of bot distribution and use, including management of software licenses, user behaviour insights and deep analytics. And all cryptographic security needs to protect an enterprise’s data are fulfilled. 
 Can chatbots make money for financial institutions? 
 Not only do chatbots enhance the experience of individuals in their interaction with their financial institutions, chatbots can also facilitate the data needs of finance professionals and provide benefits to the organisation as a whole, for instance, information analysis. Chatbots can manage the millions of bits of data stored by the financial institutions and use the metrics from the data for analysis, which can be used to meet the demands of their customers. That is not the only benefit of the data for banks. They have not even begun to monetise the information they have at their fingertips. With chatbots leading the information revolution, that will be much easier and financial institutions will wake up and realise that they are sitting on a gold mine they didn’t even know they had. 
 But best of all, Chatbots have the potential to help these institutions significantly cut labour costs. Many customer management and sales positions could be revolutionised by chatbots, providing the highest standard of efficiency and freeing staff for money making opportunities, thereby saving and making money at the same time, which is a primary target for any financial institution. For instance it is estimated that in the USA as many as 36% of sales positions could be automated, for a saving of $15 billion dollars, and up to 29% of customer service positons could be chatbot automated, saving another $23 billion. Now that’s making money. 
 In Summary 
 Chatbots are an interactive system which provides a high quality customer experience and give massive data collection tools for financial organisations, which in turn will lead to massive wealth creation opportunities. Chatbots, through consumer information servicing, are about to bring a revolution to banking. Companies like Snatchbot.me are at the forefront of that revolution. 
 