Introduction 
 Whether you are a novice at data science or a veteran, Deep learning is hard to ignore. And it deserves the attention, as deep learning is helping us achieve the AI dream of getting near human performance in every day tasks. 
 Given the importance to learn Deep learning for a data scientist, we created a skill test to help people assess themselves on Deep Learning. A total of 644 people registered for this skill test. 
 If you are one of those who missed out on this skill test, here are the questions and solutions. You missed on the real time test, but can read this article to find out how many could have answered correctly. 
 Overall Distribution 
 Below is the distribution of the scores of the participants: 
 You can access the scores here. More than 200 people participated in the skill test and the highest score obtained was 26. Interestingly, the distribution of scores ended up being very similar to past 2 tests: 
 We can use neural network to approximate any function so it can theoretically be used to solve any problem. 
 4) Which of the following statements is true when you use 1×1 convolutions in a CNN? 
 A) It can help in dimensionality reduction
B) It can be used for feature pooling
C) It suffers less overfitting due to small kernel size
D) All of the above 
 Solution: D 
 1×1 convolutions are called bottleneck structure in CNN. 
 5) Question Context: 
 Statement 1: It is possible to train a network well by initializing all the weights as 0
Statement 2: It is possible to train a network well by initializing biases as 0 
 Which of the statements given above is true? 
 A) Statement 1 is true while Statement 2 is false
B) Statement 2 is true while statement 1 is false
C) Both statements are true
D) Both statements are false 
 Solution: B 
 Even if all the biases are zero, there is a chance that neural network may learn. On the other hand, if all the weights are zero; the neural neural network may never learn to perform the task. 
 6) The number of nodes in the input layer is 10 and the hidden layer is 5. The maximum number of connections from the input layer to the hidden layer are 
 A) 50
B) Less than 50
C) More than 50
D) It is an arbitrary value 
 Solution: A 
 Since MLP is a fully connected directed graph, the number of connections are a multiple of number of nodes in input layer and hidden layer. 
 7) The input image has been converted into a matrix of size 28 X 28 and a kernel/filter of size 7 X 7 with a stride of 1. What will be the size of the convoluted matrix? 
 A) 22 X 22
B) 21 X 21
C) 28 X 28
D) 7 X 7 
 Solution: A 
 The size of the convoluted matrix is given by C=((I-F+2P)/S)+1, where C is the size of the Convoluted matrix, I is the size of the input matrix, F the size of the filter matrix and P the padding applied to the input matrix. Here P=0, I=28, F=7 and S=1. There the answer is 22. 
 8) In a simple MLP model with 8 neurons in the input layer, 5 neurons in the hidden layer and 1 neuron in the output layer. What is the size of the weight matrices between hidden output layer and input hidden layer? 
 A) [1 X 5] , [5 X 8] 
 B) [8 X 5] , [ 1 X 5] 
 C) [8 X 5] , [5 X 1] 
 D) [5 x 1] , [8 X 5] 
 Solution: D 
 The size of weights between any layer 1 and layer 2 Is given by [nodes in layer 1 X nodes in layer 2] 
 9) Given below is an input matrix named I, kernel F and Convoluted matrix named C. Which of the following is the correct option for matrix C with stride =2 ? 
 Max pooling takes a 3 X 3 matrix and takes the maximum of the matrix as the output. Slide it over the entire input matrix with a stride of 2 and you will get option (1) as the answer. 
 11) Which of the following functions can be used as an activation function in the output layer if we wish to predict the probabilities of n classes (p1, p2..pk) such that sum of p over all n equals to 1? 
 A) Softmax
B) ReLu
C) Sigmoid
D) Tanh 
 Solution: A 
 Softmax function is of the form in which the sum of probabilities over all k sum to 1. 
 12) Assume a simple MLP model with 3 neurons and inputs= 1,2,3. The weights to the input neurons are 4,5 and 6 respectively. Assume the activation function is a linear constant value of 3. What will be the output ? 
 A) 32
B) 643
C) 96
D) 48 
 Solution: C 
 The output will be calculated as 3(1*4+2*5+6*3) = 96 
 13) Which of following activation function can’t be used at output layer to classify an image ? 
 A) sigmoid
B) Tanh
C) ReLU
D) If(x>5,1,0)
E) None of the above 
 Solution: C 
 ReLU gives continuous output in range 0 to infinity. But in output layer, we want a finite range of values. So option C is correct. 
 14) [True | False] In the neural network, every parameter can have their different learning rate. 
 A) TRUE
B) FALSE 
 Solution: A 
 Yes, we can define the learning rate for each parameter and it can be different from other parameters. 
 15) Dropout can be applied at visible layer of Neural Network model? 
 A) TRUE
B) FALSE 
 Solution: A 
 Look at the below model architecture, we have added a new Dropout layer between the input (or visible layer) and the first hidden layer. The dropout rate is set to 20%, meaning one in 5 inputs will be randomly excluded from each update cycle. 
 16)I am working with the fully connected architecture having one hidden layer with 3 neurons and one output neuron to solve a binary classification challenge. Below is the structure of input and output: 
 Input dataset: [ [1,0,1,0] , [1,0,1,1] , [0,1,0,1] ] 
 Output: [ [1] , [1] , [0] ] 
 To train the model, I have initialized all weights for hidden and output layer with 1. 
 What do you say model will able to learn the pattern in the data? 
 A) Yes
B) No 
 Solution: B 
 As all the weights of the neural network model are same, so all the neurons will try to do the same thing and the model will never converge. 
 17) Which of the following neural network training challenge can be solved using batch normalization? 
 A) Overfitting
B) Restrict activations to become too high or low
C) Training is too slow
D) Both B and C
E) All of the above 
 All of the above mentioned methods can help in preventing overfitting problem. 
 End Notes 
 I tried my best to make the solutions as comprehensive as possible but if you have any questions / doubts please drop in your comments below. I would love to hear your feedback about the skill test. For more such skill tests, check out our current hackathons. 
 Question 18: The explanation for question 18 is incorrect: “Weights between input and hidden layer are constant.” The weights are not constant but rather the input to the neurons at input layer is constant. Tests like this should be more mindful in terminology: the weights themselves do not have “input”, but rather the neurons that do. 
 Question 20: while this question is technically valid, it should not appear in future tests. Since 1×1 max pooling operation is equivalent to making a copy of the previous layer it does not have any practical value. The sensible answer would have been A) TRUE. Could you elaborate a scenario that 1×1 max pooling is actually useful? 
 Q18: Consider this, whenever we depict a neural network; we say that the input layer too has neurons. Also its true that each neuron has its own weights and biases. So to represent this concept in code, what we do is, we define an input layer which has the sole purpose as a “pass through” layer which takes the input and passes it to the next layer.
Now when we backpropogate through the network, we ignore this input layer weights and update the rest of the network. So the question depicts this scenario. 
 Q20. The question was intended as a twist so that the participant would expect every scenario in which a neural network can be created. But you are correct that a 1×1 pooling layer would not have any practical value. 
 In the intro to this post, it is mentioned that “Clearly, a lot of people start the test without understanding Deep Learning, which is not the case with other skill tests.” I would like to know where I can find the other skill tests in questions. Indeed I would be interested to check the fields covered by these skill tests. Based on this example about deep learning, I tend to find this concept of skill test very useful to check your knowledge on a given field. 
 